# Address:
An integer representing a memory location (usually in RAM) where something is stored. Each address points to one byte.  So, the number of bits in an address (its width) determines how much memory can be addressed at once. For example, a 32-bit address uses a 4-byte integer to reach 232= 4GB. This determines a computer’s architecture. Addresses are pointers to a region of memory.

# API:
Application programming interface. This is a set of function declarations – i.e. instructions on how to call the functions – that are often used together. One API could have different implementations – that is, different underlying code might be called in different contexts. A library usually “exposes” an API. 

# Arguments: 
the inputs values you send to a function. The function’s parameter variables take on these values, to determine the function’s output.

Array: An ordered list of items, often numbers. Items are identified by their index, an integer usually starting at 0 or 1. For two-dimensional arrays, items are arranged in a grid, subscripted by two integers. N-dimensional arrays use N subscripts to index into the array. In scientific data, indices may represent a physical dimension like time, or subjects, sessions or conditions. Typically, arrays occupy contiguous memory locations in RAM, making it fast to access chunks of data.  
ASCII: You may know that computers store everything as binary numbers. The American standard code for information interchange the classical way to store letters using numbers. It is a character set, i.e. it assigns an integer to each standard character. 
0-8	Special conditions
9	Tab character: move to the next column in a table
10	Newline character, or ‘LF’ for line feed: move to the next line
11-31	Special conditions
32	A normal ‘ ‘ space 
33-47	The symbols that appear above the numbers on your keyboard, like !, ", $, (, *
48-57	The digits 0-9
58-64	More symbols, like =, :, @
65-90	Upper case letters A-Z
97-122	Lower case letters a-z
127	The “delete” character – often sent by your keyboard!
There are several other ways to encode characters, such as ANSI, or Unicode which is internationalised, but they all follow the same idea. 

# Binary: 
The mathematical code that allows the presence or absence of a voltage to hold numbers. Typically, a voltage indicates the bit  1,  and its absence, 0, which also indicate the logical true and false (Boolean values). Binary codes integers in base 2.

Binary file: A file that contains machine code instructions. They are the output of compilers.  Binaries are platform-specific, e.g.  files built to run on an Apple may not run on a PC. There are two reasons for this. First, compiled code calls other functions, specific to the operating system. Second, there are many different families of machine code, called architectures. 
Binary operator: An operator that takes two inputs, like +, *, and /. They are often written between their operands, called infix notation (e.g. 1+1). They can be contrasted with unary operators which are functions taking one parameter, like “not” (~,not,!) or Matlab’s transpose '. Note that the minus sign can be either a binary or a unary operator, i.e. it does subtraction or negation, as in x=-1 (actually the same is true for plus). This has nothing to do with binary. 
Bit: Binary digit. Computers represent all information using voltages, which have only two states. Alone, a bit can represent a boolean; in a group they form a byte, and represent a number. The voltage is high to represent 1 (true), or low to represent 0 (false). 
Bitmap or raster: A way of storing an image as numbers. Each pixel in the image is “mapped” to some of the bits in the store, resulting in an array of numbers. For example, it may be an 24-bit format, with each pixel having a byte corresponding to the red, green and blue channels. A bitmap has a resolution (its x and y size in pixels, and/or the number of dots per inch), and may be stored in RAM or as a file on disk. 
Block (of code): adjacent lines of code that are executed in sequence. 
Boolean: also known as logical. A variable that has only two values. Most commonly this corresponds to either true or false. Booleans are often used as flags. Inside your computer, they can be coded as bits. They are named after George Boole, great-grandfather of Geoffrey Hinton. Boole discovered the algebra formed by and, or and not operations over the two digits 0 and 1. 
Byte: The smallest unit by which a computer represents a number. It is stored as a collection of bits, often 8. In very large datasets, you may see these in data types like uint8, bytearray, ctypes.c_ubyte, or raw. These can be more efficient for certain data types, but it is easy to make mistakes like overflow or sign errors.     
Bytecode: a code similar to machine code where instructions are numbers, and variables are memory addresses.
Casting: Some types of variable can be converted (casted) to a different type. Some casts are implicit, for example promotions. Other times they have to be explicit, for example if you want to get the number 1 as a text string '1', you’d need to convert explicitly with str2num(1) / sprintf('%g',1), str(1), toString(1) / as.character(1) /paste0(1) or sprintf('%g',1).  What counts as implicit depends on your language – for example javascript automatically casts 1 to a string in ""+1. Casting can get tricky when using integer types. 
Catch: Errors or exceptions can be caught, which stops the end-user from seeing the problem. When something unexpected happens, the current operation is interrupted, and the computer looks for a catch or except block to deal with it. If none is found, the function terminates, returning to the calling function. The exception then propagates up the call stack, i.e. the exception is raised in the calling code. Only uncaught exceptions result in a red error message!
Character: A character is a single letter, number, or symbol. Characters, or strings (a sequence of characters), are distinguished from keywords, names of variables or functions, by the use of single quotes. Examples include A, z, 9, [, the quotation mark itself ', and whitespace characters like space  , tab     , and the newline character. Internally, the computer represents characters in a character set. 
Character set: a standard mapping from numbers to characters, using a code. For example ASCII maps each character to a single byte, and Unicode maps each to a variable number of bytes, using encodings. Each possible value is called a code point.
Class or Type: Everything inside a computer is an integer, stored in bytes. Programming languages allow you to store things that aren’t just integers, like words, decimals, complex numbers, matrices and tables. Languages maintain a label for each variable that indicates whether to interpret the bytes as something else. This is called the type. You can look up a variable’s type using class(), type(), class().  The type might even be a function, where the bytes represent code. Object-oriented programming allows you to define your own complicated types, usually called classes,  which supply code to go with the data. 
Collision: two variables collide if they have the same name, within the same namespace. This may cause hard-to-spot errors.
Compile: to convert high-level human-readable code into a more machine-friendly form. For example, a statement a=1 might be compiled into a few numbers, which correspond to bytecode or machine code that can be understood by lower levels of the computer. 
Console: In this usage, it’s a text interface where you type commands at a prompt, followed by enter, and the computer interprets them. Examples include the operating system command line (Windows CMD, Linux bash) and the interactive prompt or ‘command window’ for Matlab, Python and R. 
Constant: something that will not change. For instance, the literals ‘A’ and 2 are constants. It might sound like an oxymoron, but Variables are often Constants. A constant variable usually contains a number or a string that is expected to remain the same for your whole script.  
Core: each central processing unit (CPU) chip has multiple independent cores – in a home computer this could range from 1 to 12. Each core has its own strand of execution, which permits running multiple computations in parallel. 
CPU: the central processing unit is the part of the computer responsible for interpreting instructions in the currently running software. All instructions are in machine code, a low-level language comprising numbers called byte codes. The CPU is a chip, or part of a chip. It can also store a small amount of data – a dozen or so numbers called registers – that maintain immediately important information, like which instruction it has got to. The CPU fetches its instructions and data from RAM, locating them by numbers termed addresses, and sends commands to other chips like disk and video controllers. 
Declaration: a line of code that gives details about a variable or function, before the creation of the variable or the definition of the function. For functions, it usually specifies how to call the function. Typically this will include the inputs to the function, called parameters, and the output, called the return value.   
Definition: The lines of code that tell the computer how to actually run a function. It consists of a header, the function body, and return statements. 
Dependency: You should always specify what other code or resources your program needs to run, i.e. your dependencies. All code needs other code to run, including an operating system, and for science you need an interpreter for your programming language. But you may also need additional libraries of code from other people, data files, templates, or image files. 
Design pattern: A coding style or template to solve particular problem. Covered in section 6.4. 
Double: a double-precision floating-point value. Usually these are stored in a 64-bit format. They can represent very small numbers (near zero) and also very large numbers (positive or negative) with lower precision. 
Entry point: the first section of code that should be run, within your program. Often the entry point is the first line of the program. But when you provide a folder full of scripts, it is not always clear how to find the entry point. In some languages, the entry point is called main, init, or may have the same name as your program.  
Exception: an unexpected situation that your code doesn’t have enough information to deal with. An exception interrupts what you are doing, and asks the calling code, which catches the exception. 
Flag: A boolean variable that signifies whether something is or should be the case. Flags can act as switches, or to signal an event or state. 
Float: a floating point number has a variable precision. For example, numbers in the range 1 to 10 are represented to about 16 decimal places, whereas numbers around 1016 are represented to the nearest 1. 
Forward model: Also known as a generative model or predictive model.  This is a way to produce data from some parameters. For example, if I know that adults are 1.5 to 1.7m tall, and their weight is about 22×height2, then I could generate 100 random people. Or if you know where a cannon points, you can generate a cannonball’s trajectory, and its uncertainty. Common generative models include linear or nonlinear mixed models, gaussian processes, Markov models, plant-controller / dynamic models and many artificial neural networks.  
Function: a self-contained block of code with defined inputs and outputs.  see Chapter 7 and commonly confused terms below.
Global: a variable is global rather than local if it is accessible from any function. Its scope is your whole program – and any other code running in the same interpreter. Globals are created on the heap and therefore persist across function calls. They are forbidden in functional programming and can lead to difficult-to-spot errors. They can often be avoided by passing information correctly. 
GPU (Graphics processing unit): A chip that interprets instructions, like a CPU does, but is specialised for large arrays. Traditionally these were used to copy, move or combine bitmap images efficiently. But the same operations allow large vectors or matrices of numbers to be manipulated very quickly. 
HTML: Web pages are written in hypertext markup language. HTML files are text files, with an XML-like structure of nested tags such as <body>Hello</body>. 
IDE: Integrated development environment. A program that includes a text editor specifically designed for code, as well as running and debugging programs. For scientific computing, IDEs include a console in which you can type commands that are immediately executed. 
Include: an include is a source code file that gets inserted – at compile or run time – into your code. It is a dependency, and allows code to be written once but used many times. 
Indirection: When something needs to be done, you usually call a function. But what if you need to change what actually gets done? You can introduce an extra layer in which you can decide to do one of several options. For example, when you print a value to the console, you are actually writing to a buffer that might be the screen, a file on the disk, or a remote connection. The print function includes a layer of indirection, meaning that the underlying code that gets executed (to fulfil your request to print) might be completely different depending on the user context. 
Hash table: a way of storing a map of key-value pairs that gives a fast lookup time. The keys, which may be text, numbers or other objects, are hashed – this simply converts the key object into a number.  This hash code is a digest or checksum that is “quite likely” to be unique (according to some criterion). This partitions the space of all possible keys into bins or buckets. The key-value pair are kept in the key’s bucket, so they can be found extremely quickly given the key.  
Implementation: Once you know what you need to do, implementation is writing the code to actually do it. Implementation contrasts with an interface, which merely specifies what can be done, and what information transactions can occur. Interfaces need to be implemented.  
Integer: a whole number, like 0, 1, 99, or -4. They have a fixed width, i.e. a fixed number of bits, with no exponent to determine their scale. This means they can easily reach their maximum and minimum values, which can lead to overflow errors. They can be unsigned or signed. For example an 8-bit unsigned integer ranges from 0 to 255 (which is 2^8 – 1, stored as 11111111 in binary). In contrast in an 8-bit signed integer, one of the 8 bits is used up to represent whether the value is positive or negative, so the values range from -128 to +127.
Interface: a set of function declarations that are used together to operate on similar objects. These functions are the points of contact between your code and your user’s code. For example, there might be an interface for manipulating plot axes. In object-oriented code, abstract class declarations form an interface for objects of that type: they provide a set of functions to manipulate the data in the object. 
Interpreter: modern scientific languages read code as text, convert it to a low-level code, then run it. Interpreters are usually contrasted with compilers, but in reality most languages do something in between, pre-compiling the predictable parts and interpreting the complex parts, to maximise speed.  
Library: a set of functions that are often used together, but are not tied to a specific use-case. They often provide an API (application programming interface), which is the part of the library that you can see and interact with.
Linking: a process where function calls in a user’s code are mapped onto function definitions in a library. When you write a+b, the language must work out which version of addition function you are trying to invoke. Is it integer, floating point or complex addition, or in Python do you want list or string concatenation? Inferring the right function might occur at compile time (static linking), or while your program is running (dynamic linking). 
Lint: a program that reads your code, tries to make sense of it without actually running it, and warns you about anything that looks suspicious. Lint can usually be configured with various thresholds, about how pernickety it will be.
Literal: a ‘raw’ number or character string appearing in your code. Literals are really data, not code. Purists suggest you should externalise literals in constant variables, which you name semantically. 
Literate programming: a style where variables and functions have longer names, so that reading the code reads more like English. There is no doubt what this line of code does: wait_for( number_of_seconds + 60*number_of_minutes ). Literate styles provide an alternative to commenting.
Local: a temporary assignment, that has a limited scope. Names correspond to variables and functions; these bindings are created by definition and assignment. Those bindings can appear and disappear. Local variables are those visible only in the current scope, and vanish when the current block exits. Typically this happens inside a function.
Map: also known as a lookup table, associative array, or dictionary. The map stores keys paired with values. You can look up a value by providing a key. The keys must be unique, though the values need not be. An array is an example of a map, where the keys are integers. A common, fast implementation of maps is a hash table.  
Mask: A pattern of 1’s and 0’s, or Trues and Falses, which are used to say which parts of an array are being operated on. You can “mask out” parts of an array using multiplication by a boolean, or by Boolean indexing.
Metadata: additional information that needs to be kept together with a dataset. It tells you something about the data, and how to interpret it. For example, you might want to keep the date of recording, experiment version number, original filename, or the parameters used to acquire the data. 
Most-significant bit: We write numbers in “columns of ten” – i.e. hundreds, tens and units. The most-significant digit of the number 456 is 4. It is the most important digit. In binary, the same thing can be done, and for large integers, the most-significant byte is the equivalent idea in base 256. In general we write the MSB first, because it helps us sort values lexically.
Namespace: Language interpreters create and maintain maps from variable names (which are strings) to variable values. For example, the code a=1 creates a key a, linked to a value 1, within the most current map. The names remain bound to the values within a particular context – termed a namespace. Languages have different rules about which namespace is consulted when you use a variable name.
NaN: Not-a-Number is a special “number”, that signifies something went wrong in a calculation. It propagates so that calculations involving NaN also result in NaN. 
Open source: Software is open source when its source code is freely available. A language is open source when the code of the interpreter or compiler other source code is also freely available. 
Operating system (OS): The operating system is a computer program that runs all the time in the background. Whenever your computer is on, it acts as a life support system for other programs. It provides functions to put text on the screen, to read files from a disk, and read keypresses from the keyboard. Microsoft Windows, Apple iOS, Linux and Android and are the three commonest operating system types. 
Operator: Operators are functions that can be written as symbols in an expression. For example the functions plus(a,b), float.__add__(a,b), `+`(a,b) can be written as an infix operator  a+b. 
Operator precedence: All languages carry out mathematical operations in a specific order, that is not the order they are written in the code. 1+2*3^4 == 1 + (2* (3^4) ).
Overflow: an error condition where there is no space for an operation. For example, a number may get too big for its container. This is rare when you use modern data formats, which can store obscenely big numbers. Another example is overflow of the function-call stack (stack overflow), which usually means you have called your function from within itself.  
Parameter: A variable that you set up early, then use to control some aspect of the code that runs later. In a function, formal parameters are specified as placeholders for inputs, which get replaced with the arguments provided when the function is called. 
Parse: Segment a stream into meaningful components. Code stored in a text file can be parsed into blocks, statements, expressions, terms and ‘atoms’ like variable names or literal constants. A parser is a function that takes a stream (eg. an array of symbols), as input, and spits out a tree or other structured representation of that stream.
Pass-by-value: In Matlab and R, when a function is called, a copy of the inputs is created in the new stack frame. When the function returns, these copies are deleted, along with any changes made. To make changes, the function must explicitly return the changed values, and the caller must assign this to overwrite the original variables.
Pass-by-reference: In Python, when a function is called with arrays, lists or objects as arguments, a ‘reference’ or pointer to the inputs is placed in the stack frame. This means that any changes to that variable, made within the function, will be reflected in the original data, and are visible to the caller. This can be useful for sending information back to the caller, instead of returning a value. However, it can result in unexpected side-effects. Such a function is not “pure”. 
Promotion: A promotion, or a broadening conversion, is a type cast that moves a value into a larger space in case it needs to expand. For example, the expression 2*0.5 converts the integer 2 to a floating point number 2.0 before doing the multiplication, so the result is 1.0 rather than an integer type.  
Pseudocode: A fictional programming language that you make up, when communicating with a human, for the sake of clarity or economy.
RAM: Random-access memory is the computer’s short-term storage, that is usually volatile, i.e. destroyed when a computer is switched off. The name contrasts with the old-fashioned ROM (read-only memory) which stores hard-wired instructions that could not be changed after the computer was built. Functionally, it contrasts with information on disk, which remains after a computer is switched off. Computers have much more storage on disk than they have in RAM, so you can only load a tiny amount from the disk into RAM, at one time.  The amount of RAM varies a lot from computer to computer, and is shared between all the programs you currently have open. RAM can also be contrasted with other writeable stores, such as hard disks (magnetic media), writeable DVDs (optical media), and solid-state disks (NAND flash, the type used in mobile phones and USB sticks), which are all slower than RAM and are not directly addressed by the CPU.  
Refactoring: Shuffling segments of code around, changing names of variables, or changing the structure of your data, but without changing the algorithm. Usually refactoring aims to improve re-usability and readability (see 7.8 refactoring).
Referential transparency: A function is referentially transparent if it has no side-effects, and does nothing other than produce an output value. As a further criterion, its output value should depend solely on its inputs, so that it behaves like a mathematical function.
Scope: Variables are created at a point in the code. The region of code where that variable exists is called its scope. Or more precisely, scope is the region of code where the name is bound to a value. If a variable is created inside a function, its scope is limited to that function, because it is created inside a stack frame. This provides a neat way of keeping variables organised and tidy.  
Shadowing: When a name is defined twice, only one definition is seen. The latest or closest definition may overwrite or dominate. This can be avoided by using namespaces (see 7.3).
Source code: a program in the form it was originally written in, before compiling. It is a human-readable text document.
Stack: The function-call stack is a part of the computer’s memory where it keeps track of which functions called the current function. Each stack consists of frames: contexts with all the local variables present at the time each function call occurred (See Ch.7).   
Stack frame: (see 7.4) a region of memory freshly allocated each time your function is invoked, and deleted once the function completes.  It contains the local variables created within the function. 
String: A string is an array of characters, i.e. a collection of letters. It could be a word, or a sentence, or a whole book.  
Type: (see also class) All variables stored in memory are assigned a type. They could be integers, floating point values, strings, or user-defined types. In some languages, the types of objects are called classes.
Unicode: Unicode is a standard character set that unites various encodings. To do this, it is variable width, meaning some characters may take up more bytes than others. The commonest encoding is UTF-8, which includes ASCII characters, but adds codes for  
Variable width codes: To encode information into numbers, you need to define a mapping. You can minimise the space that the numbers take up in RAM or on disk, by allowing common items to be coded in a single byte, whereas rare items need to occupy many bytes. 
White space: Characters that you can’t see are called white space. Typically the ones used in programming are spaces, tabs and newlines. Along with operators, they divide up tokens (variable names, function names) in your code. In many cases, you can add as much whitespace as you like without changing the meaning of your code: whitespace tends to be semantically neutral (except in Python indentation).
XML: A standard format for storing complex data in a text file. The data is hierarchically organised within nested ‘tags’. Tags begin with a term in angled brackets, accompanied by parameter-value pairs (e.g. <channel rate=”10hz”>), followed by some data, and are terminated by a matching tag preceded by a slash (i.e. </channel>).
